Protogen, the Protocol Generator
================================

The MDI protocol generator aims to simplify the communication protocol between MDI devices and servers. Given a JSON file that describes a protocol, Protogen generates Ruby or Java code to be used in the server SDK VM (and Ragent) or on the device.

The issue addressed by Protogen is: the developer should not have to deal with "low-level" details such as writing serialization code or managing cookies. The developer using Protogen code simply has to write the callbacks he defined in its protocol.

The generated code takes care of the following problems:

* efficient serialization of messages (currently using msgpack)
* calling user-defined callbacks when needed
* error handling (timeouts and so on)
* managing the state machine on the device (server is stateless)
* cookies
* splitting big messages sent from the server and assembling them back on the device


## Dependencies

You will need Ruby version 1.9 (Protogen has been tested on MRI Ruby 1.9.3).

If you want to generate and compile the device-side Java code, you will need a Java development environement. For compatibility with the Morpheus SDK and the current Java version on the device, Java 6 is recommended. You will need the `jar` and `javac` java build tools installed on your system (they come with any Java 6 JDK). It also needs the device core `.jar`. You can find a default `jar` in `config/mdi-framework-3.X.jar`. If you wish to use your own `jar`, you can define it in your configuration file.

(deactivated) You will also need doxygen installed, if you wish to have documentation aside from generated code.

## Compatibility information

Protogen generated device code has been tested with version 3.2.6 of the core (revision D3.2.6-87-gc72c37e, dpn "Deployment_MP6_light") and is probably incompatible with earlier versions.

Server code has been tested with the version v0.2.4-rc204 of the server SDK VM (this version can handle only one protocol file. A small update to make the server SDK accept several protocol files is needed for this version), and is probably compatible with earlier versions as well given small adaptations to the Protogen configuration file used by the server SDK.

## Usage

Protogen is basically a Ruby script that takes as input protocol description files and a configuration file, and outputs either Ruby code (to be used with Ragent or the server SDK) or a compiled Java `jar` (to be used on the device), depending on the configuration file.

To generate code, you need to launch:

    bundle exec ruby protogen.rb <protocol_file_path_1> <protocol_file_path_2> <configuration_file_path>

where

* `protocol_file_path_X` is the path to a protocol file. If you generate Ruby code, you can provide several versions of the same protocol, and the generated Ruby code will be able to handle all these versions. If you generate device code, you must provide only one protocol file.
* `configuration_file_path` is the path to the file which will configure how your code will be generated.

## Protocol file

See `doc/protocol_file.md` for a description of the protocol file.

## Configuration file

This file describe how the code will be generated. It can either be written by the user, if he wants to generate code on his own, or be generated by a specific platform (the server SDK VM for example). They use the JSON syntax.

### Device configuration file

    {
      "plugins":  [
        "mdi_sdk_vm_device_java"
      ],
      "agent_name":"ProtogenAgentTest",
      "device_output_directory":"sdk_defined_directory",
      "java_package":"com.mdi.test.protogen.avril11", /* the name of the java package in which all the code will be generated. */
      "keep_java_source":false, /* whether the source files are included in the release (they will be copied in the output folder.*/
      "keep_java_jar":true, /* whether the jar is included in the release */
      "mdi_framework_jar":"/home/guillaume/sdk/MDI-SDK-3.0.14-rc1-linux-x86_64/plugins/com.mdi.project.fw_3.0.13.20121016153400/mdi-framework-3.X/simulator/mdi-framework-3.X.jar" /* path to the mdi framework. Used only when compiling java during code generation and to override default framework in config.*/
    }

### Server configuration file

    {
      "plugins":  [
        "mdi_sdk_vm_server_ruby"
      ],
      "agent_name":"ProtogenAgentTest",
      "server_output_directory":"sdk_defined_directory",
      "user_callbacks":"sdk_defined_directory" /* protogen will look for user-defined callbacks in this directory */
      "generate_ruby_documentation": false /* whether to invoke YARD to generate documentation for the Ruby generated code */
    }

## Use the Protogen-generated code ###

The file `doc/protogen_for_the_user.md` explains how a developer can use the Protogen generated code.

## Known issues

* As of core version 3.2.6, the `MessageGateHelper` defined by the core and used by Protogen can call the callback `onTimeout()` even if the `onReplyComplete()` callback is called.
For the Protogen user, this means that the Protogen callback "timeout_callback" can be called in parallel with the callback "received_callback".
It can occurs if the timeout expires during the processing in `onReplyComplete()` or just before the conversation is marked as terminated.
This was considered as a bug in the `MessageGateHelper`, so Protogen has no fix around this problem.

* When generating device code, Protogen will exit with status 0 (success) even if the compilation of the generated Java code failed. Protogen will output the result of the compilation, check that the compilation was successful. Note that if there are no bugs in Protogen, the compilation should never fail. But in the real life...

* Protogen sometimes throws a `NullPointerException` when handling large messages

```
2013/11/12 17:06.30  EventDispatcher::EventListenerExec::run: unexpected error java.lang.NullPointerException
2013/11/12 17:06.30  java.lang.NullPointerException
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at java.io.OutputStream.write(OutputStream.java:82)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.test.sequences.Splitter.assemble(Splitter.java:81)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.test.sequences.Splitter.assemble(Splitter.java:70)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.test.sequences.Codec.decode(Codec.java:95)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.test.sequences.Sequences$SimpleQuestionToServer$FirstShotForSimpleQuestionToServer.onReply(Sequences.java:468)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.mdi.tools.helpers.messagegate.Query.getReply(Query.java:278)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.mdi.tools.helpers.messagegate.MessageGateHelper.treatMessageReception(MessageGateHelper.java:631)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.mdi.tools.helpers.messagegate.MessageGateHelper.dispatchEvent(MessageGateHelper.java:593)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.mdi.tools.events.EventDispatcher$EventListenerExec.run(EventDispatcher.java:56)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.mdi.tools.events.EventDispatcher$EventListenerContainer.process(EventDispatcher.java:103)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.mdi.tools.events.EventDispatcher.notifyListener(EventDispatcher.java:574)
2013/11/12 17:06.30   at com.mdi.tools.events.EventDispatcher.run(EventDispatcher.java:618)
```

If you know how to reproduce this exception, please report it, as for now it is not known how to reproduce the error.

Also note that the cookie feature has not been thoroughly tested.

## Tests

(Tests are really scarce and now mostly outdated - do not rely on them).

To launch the protogen tests, you simply have to launch the test.rb script at the root of the protogen. Be sure that the sdk vm is up, and that you have released the same version of the protogen on the vm (using for example "./release_sdk.rb -l").
